---
layout: post
title: Murderous Twins and the Two Faces of Identity
author: Joseph Turner
tags: data identity
category: data
---

How do we prove our identity? What makes us unique, and how can we
display that uniqueness to others? As animals, our physical bodies, our
genetic makeup offers one answer, but it is potentially
fallible: what about identical twins?  If two identical twins went on a
camping trip and only one returned, how could we tell which twin it
was?<sup><a href="#1">1</a></sup>
And beyond identical twins,
biometric identity verification would be awkward to implement uniformly
at scale, and it poses privacy issues.

A second possibility is our knowledge, or more broadly, our possessions.
This is what we use most often in our daily lives. We bring our social
security card in to get a drivers license, then we use that drivers
license to open a bank account. We use the credit card we are issued to
make a purchase. When we call the bank, we
recount our last three purchases to prove we are indeed the person named
on the account. Though much more practical, this too is fallible, as evidenced by a never ending rash
of social engineering attacks and stolen bank information. To return to
our evil twin, perhaps you could quiz her on some details of her
supposed life.
This would only smoke her out in the case where she hadn't
done her research.

How do we catch this devilish [Mary Kate (or was it Ashley?)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CJEoASUMZbI).
The evil twin returns to "her" life,
with a husband and two kids. After a couple weeks, she returns to work.
She seems different at first, but that's to be expected after such a
traumatic experience. After a while though, it starts to get weird. She
quits her book club that she loved so much. She can't remember her
inside jokes with her husband. The songs she sings her kids at night are
different songs. With every day, her real identity becomes more apparent: she
isn't who she says she is.

And this brings us to our third indicator of our identities: our
actions. In everything we do we display facets of our accumulated
knowledge, experience, and idiosyncrasies. Individually, these
activities prove nothing, but combined they define our identity in a way
that is very hard to fool. Though she might hold up to our initial
scrutiny with enough information, it would be basically impossible for
her to act consistently like her sister all day, every day.

## The two aspects of online identity

Online, without physical form, we are all identical twins. With no
physical differentiation, our
identities live solely in the context of our knowledge and our
possessions. As a consequence, our online identities have two aspects:
**identity as resource** and **identity as actor**<sup><a href="#2">2</a></sup>.

### Identity as resource

By passing an identity challenge, whether it's entering your password,
entering a texted authentication code, or copying the numbers from your [RSA
token](http://www.emc.com/security/rsa-securid.htm),
you are granted your *identity resource*. The resource allows the
holder to perform the actions granted to that identity. This process is
called *authentication*.

Historically,
much effort has gone into building the fortifications surrounding the
identity resource. In the recent past (and for many, still to this day), enterprises kept all resources
behind the firewall, requiring physical presence (or the secret handshake
of a VPN) to even get the opportunity to try and prove your identity.

The move to the cloud has made limiting access in this way much trickier.
Without physically limited access, much work has gone into improving the challenge
itself. Two-factor authentication and related technologies are modern-day
attempts to make access to the identity resource more selective.
Unfortunately, they also make it harder to make legitimate identity
claims. Though its easy to gloss over it, this is a serious barrier to
usability. Like the firewall that came before, it seems like a trade-off many companies are
willing to make. Also like the firewall, it isn't foolproof.

### Identity as actor

We need more. We need the online equivalent of the concerned
husband, the suspicious coworkers, and the irate book club. We need
insight into the
second face of identity online, one that has been ignored too long: *identity as
actor*. 

As in real life, our actions online create and define our identities, as
unique as our fingerprints. Like our evil twin, 
an attacker who has
passed the challenge and acquired the identity resource must act
consistently with their assumed identity or risk detection - assuming,
that is, that the actions are being observed and the differences are
being noticed.

The problem is, of course, that it is **really tough** to monitor our online
identities! We take actions across a range of services, some of which in
fact use different identity resources, often using several services at
the same time. In general, these services are not controlled by the same
party, and our actions on a given service are not visible to other identities or other services.
As a result, it can be very difficult to get a clear picture of the
actions taken by an identity online.

Ultimately, we need protection mechanisms around both faces of our
online identities. We need *adaptive authentication* to provide safety
around the identity resource without breaking workflows, introducing
confusion, and crippling usability. We also need *[identity
analytics](/blog/post/identity-analytics/)* to notice an attacker's
errant behavior and *adaptive access control* to respond to our suspicions as
they grow stronger.

With [Interlock](http://www.mobilesystem7.com/interlock/) we at Mobile System 7
believe that we are providing the
first unified platform for all three of the above protections, across
services, and across identities. You can be confident
that no evil twin is stealing your identity, because we'll be there to notice
when they don't show up at book club or forget to laugh at the [inside jokes](http://rationalmale.files.wordpress.com/2011/09/doitlive.jpeg).
Metaphorically speaking, of
course.

Have questions or comments? Hit me up [on
Twitter](https://twitter.com/josephturnip). Interested in changing the
face of identity with us? [Send me your
resume.](mailto:turner@mobilesystem7.com)

<hr />
<a name="1"></a>**1:** It turns out that identical twins have different fingerprints, but have
you ever had your fingerprints taken? I haven't.

<a name="2"></a>**2:** Why is that a consequence of our online presence?
In the real world, after we have proven our identities, say by showing
our drivers license, our **faces** become a token of our identities. If
we open a bank account today, the teller will remember our face
tomorrow, obviating the need for a second challenge. Online, we have a
similar capability, cookies. However, as we move across devices we don't
carry our cookies with us, unlike our faces. As a result, online
our proof of identity is required semi-regularly before we can take
action.
