---
layout: post
title: "D3 Tooltips with Interrupted Transitions"
author: Andrei Taraschuk
tags: d3 js javascript visualization
category: js
---

At [Mobile System 7](http://www.mobilesystem7.com/) we extensively use [D3 Javascript Library](https://github.com/mbostock/d3/wiki)
in all of our data visualization components. Whenever a complex data structure is depicted we use tooltips
to provide additional context. In this post I show how to build a simple tooltip with fade transitions. Let's get started!

First create a tooltip element and hide it by default (opacity = 0).

     var tooltip = d3.select('body').append('div')
         .attr('class', 'my-tooltip-class')
         .style('opacity', 0);

Next, wire in mouse events to show and hide the tooltip. Note that we are using transition.delay() to prevent the tooltip from showing immediately upon mouse over.

    .on('mouseover', function (d) {
        tooltip.style('opacity', 0);
        tooltip.transition().delay(300).duration(500).style('opacity', 0.9);
    })

Lastly, in the 'mouseout' event we need to interrupt (remove) any existing transitions and delays in the queue, then hide the tooltip. Keep in mind that unless the
transition is interrupted the tooltip will still be displayed after the delay.

    .on('mouseout', function () {
            tooltip.interrupt().transition();
            tooltip.style('opacity', 0);
     });

Here's the complete code:

    var tooltip = d3.select("body").append("div")
                .attr("class", "my-tooltip-class")
                .style("opacity", 0),

        svg = d3.select('body').append("svg")
                .attr("width", 50)
                .attr("height", 50)
                .append("g").attr("transform", "translate(0,0)");

        svg.append("rect")
            .attr("x", 0).attr("y", 0)
            .attr("width", 100).attr("height", 100).attr("fill", 'red')
            .on("mouseout", function () {
                tooltip.interrupt().transition();
                tooltip.style("opacity", 0);
            })
            .on("mouseover", function () {
                tooltip.style("opacity", 0);

                // Note that we are also using d3.event pageX and pageY properties
                // to position the tooltip

                tooltip.html('Hello world')
                    .style("left", (d3.event.pageX) + "px")
                    .style("top", (d3.event.pageY - 25) + "px");

                tooltip.transition().delay(300).duration(500).style("opacity", 0.9);
            });